README.md, before:

# Dolphyin - inferring 1-Dollo, or persistent, phylogenies from single cell SNV sequencing data

Dolphyin takes in a binary matrix of single cell SNV sequencing data and outputs a 1-Dollo phylogeny on this data, or a rooted tree on which each character / SNV is gained and lost at most once. Underlying Dolphyin is a theoretical characterization and decomposition of all data matrices admitting a 1-Dollo phylogeny, which is turn stems from recursively breaking 1-Dollo phylogenies into 1-Dollo linear phylogenies characterizable with the consecutive ones property (Fulkerson and Gross (1965)).

![Overview of Dolphyin's 1-Dollo decomposition](summary-figure.png)

Dolphyin can also probabilistically account for false negatives in data and can thus be applied to real data. We also include source code (check-FN.cpp) that, given any phylogeny inferred by Dolphyin, will calculate the phylogeny's false-negative rate and provide a .txt file of the tree's [Graphviz](https://graphviz.org/) visualization.

## Contents

  1. [Getting started](#start)
     * [Dependencies](#dep)
     * [Compilation](#comp)
  2. [Usage instructions](#usage)
     * [I/O formats](#io)
     * [Example](#example)

     
<a name="start"></a>
## Getting started

Dolphyin is implemented in C++. If using Dolphyin, we recommend checking out only src, as input and output contain several thousand files of data.

| Folder    | DESCRIPTION                                                  |
| --------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `src`     | source code for Dolphyin                                     |
| `input`   | simulated data with errors, based on simulations in SPhyR (El-Kebir (2018)) and real data from an acute myeloid leukemia cohort (Morita et. al (2020)) |re                             
| `output`| results on error-free simulations, simulations with error, and real data |re

<a name="dep"></a>

### Dependencies   

Dolphyin has the following dependencies:

* [C++](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/11) (>= 11)

<a name="comp"></a>
### Compilation

To compile Dolphyin in C++, execute the following commands from the root of the repository:

    $ g++ -std=c++11 src/run-Dolphyin.cpp -o src/run-Dolphyin.o

To compile the additional check-FN in C++, execute the following commands from the root of the repository:

    $ g++ -std=c++11 src/check-FN.cpp -o src/check-FN.o

<a name="usage"></a>
## Usage Instructions

<a name="io"></a>
### I/O formats
The input to Dolphyin is a .csv or .txt file that, after two lines which denote the number of m cells and n sequenced SNVs, contains m rows and n columns where m is the the number of single cells and n is the number of mutations. All entries in the .csv file should be either 1 if SNV j is present in cell i and 0 otherwise. Dolphyin's second parameter is a .txt file location to which it will write the clades of the returned 1-Dollo phylogeny. Lastly, Dolphyin takes in parameters p, e, and seed for error correction. p denotes the percentage of row pairs to randomly consider for error correction, e denotes the normalized Hamming distance that each row pair must be under in order to correct both by replacing each with their bitwise OR, and seed is a randomness seed for this error correction.

The input to check-FN is a .csv or .txt file of the original data, the .txt file of Dolphyin's output tree, a .txt file to which the false negative count and false negative rate is written, and an optional .txt file to which a [Graphvis](https://graphviz.org/) tree visualization will be written.


```
Usage:
  ./src/run-dolphyin.o
     [-input str] [-output-dolphyin-tree str] [-p double] [-k double] [-seed int]
  ./src/check-FN.o
     [-input str] [-dolphyin-tree str] [-output-FN str] *[-output-graphviz str]

```
<a name="example"></a>
## Example
The following is an example of how to use Dolphyin.

```
./src/run-dolphyin.o input/sims/errors/m25_n25_s1_k1_loss0.1.txt output-m25_n25_s1_k1_loss0.1.txt 0.25 0.00 1

```
<<<<<<< HEAD

The following is an example of how to use the check-FN executable to get the false-negative rate and [Graphvis](https://graphviz.org/) phylogeny visualization file of Dolphyin's output.

```
./src/check-FN.o input/sims/errors/m25_n25_s1_k1_loss0.1.txt output-m25_n25_s1_k1_loss0.1.txt output-m25_n25_s1_k1_loss0.1-FNrate.txt output-m25_n25_s1_k1_loss0.1-vis.txt

```

The following is an example of how to Graphvis to examine a phylogeny after using Dolphyin and the check-FN executable. Dolphyin and the check-FN executable are not dependent on the installation of Graphvis. The visualization file can be editted to customize the resulting image (removing the explicit labeling of nodes mapping to 0 taxa, labeling characters with other identifiers, etc.) Below is Graphvis's uneditted output.

```
dot -Tsvg output-m25_n25_s1_k1_loss0.1-vis.txt

```

![Graphvis visualization](example-visualization.png)
=======
>>>>>>> 8caef5c8059f4e4a4161b4846ef10a2256a48ba3

Commit message:

Adding additional usage example for extra visualization executable and code to make summary plots on data

README.md, after:

# Dolphyin - inferring 1-Dollo, or persistent, phylogenies from single cell SNV sequencing data

Dolphyin takes in a binary matrix of single cell SNV sequencing data and outputs a 1-Dollo phylogeny on this data, or a rooted tree on which each character / SNV is gained and lost at most once. Underlying Dolphyin is a theoretical characterization and decomposition of all data matrices admitting a 1-Dollo phylogeny, which is turn stems from recursively breaking 1-Dollo phylogenies into 1-Dollo linear phylogenies characterizable with the consecutive ones property (Fulkerson and Gross (1965)).

![Overview of Dolphyin's 1-Dollo decomposition](summary-figure.png)

Dolphyin can also probabilistically account for false negatives in data and can thus be applied to real data. We also include source code (check-FN.cpp) that, given any phylogeny inferred by Dolphyin, will calculate the phylogeny's false-negative rate and provide a .txt file of the tree's [Graphviz](https://graphviz.org/) visualization.

## Contents

  1. [Getting started](#start)
     * [Dependencies](#dep)
     * [Compilation](#comp)
  2. [Usage instructions](#usage)
     * [I/O formats](#io)
     * [Example](#example)

     
<a name="start"></a>
## Getting started

Dolphyin is implemented in C++. If using Dolphyin, we recommend checking out only src, as input and output contain several thousand files of data.

| Folder    | DESCRIPTION                                                  |
| --------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `src`     | source code for Dolphyin                                     |
| `input`   | simulated data with errors, based on simulations in SPhyR (El-Kebir (2018)) and real data from an acute myeloid leukemia cohort (Morita et. al (2020)) |re                             
| `output`| results on error-free simulations, simulations with error, and real data |re

<a name="dep"></a>

### Dependencies   

Dolphyin has the following dependencies:

* [C++](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/11) (>= 11)

<a name="comp"></a>
### Compilation

To compile Dolphyin in C++, execute the following commands from the root of the repository:

    $ g++ -std=c++11 src/run-Dolphyin.cpp -o src/run-Dolphyin.o

To compile the additional check-FN in C++, execute the following commands from the root of the repository:

    $ g++ -std=c++11 src/check-FN.cpp -o src/check-FN.o

<a name="usage"></a>
## Usage Instructions

<a name="io"></a>
### I/O formats
The input to Dolphyin is a .csv or .txt file that, after two lines which denote the number of m cells and n sequenced SNVs, contains m rows and n columns where m is the the number of single cells and n is the number of mutations. All entries in the .csv file should be either 1 if SNV j is present in cell i and 0 otherwise. Dolphyin's second parameter is a .txt file location to which it will write the clades of the returned 1-Dollo phylogeny. Lastly, Dolphyin takes in parameters p, e, and seed for error correction. p denotes the percentage of row pairs to randomly consider for error correction, e denotes the normalized Hamming distance that each row pair must be under in order to correct both by replacing each with their bitwise OR, and seed is a randomness seed for this error correction.

The input to check-FN is a .csv or .txt file of the original data, the .txt file of Dolphyin's output tree, a .txt file to which the false negative count and false negative rate is written, and an optional .txt file to which a [Graphvis](https://graphviz.org/) tree visualization will be written.


```
Usage:
  ./src/run-dolphyin.o
     [-input str] [-output-dolphyin-tree str] [-p double] [-k double] [-seed int]
  ./src/check-FN.o
     [-input str] [-dolphyin-tree str] [-output-FN str] *[-output-graphviz str]

```
<a name="example"></a>
## Example
The following is an example of how to use Dolphyin.

```
./src/run-dolphyin.o input/sims/errors/m25_n25_s1_k1_loss0.1.txt output-m25_n25_s1_k1_loss0.1.txt 0.25 0.00 1

```

The following is an example of how to use the check-FN executable to get the false-negative rate and [Graphvis](https://graphviz.org/) phylogeny visualization file of Dolphyin's output.

```
./src/check-FN.o input/sims/errors/m25_n25_s1_k1_loss0.1.txt output-m25_n25_s1_k1_loss0.1.txt output-m25_n25_s1_k1_loss0.1-FNrate.txt output-m25_n25_s1_k1_loss0.1-vis.txt

```

The following is an example of how to Graphvis to examine a phylogeny after using Dolphyin and the check-FN executable. Dolphyin and the check-FN executable are not dependent on the installation of Graphvis. The visualization file can be editted to customize the result (removing the explicit labeling of nodes mapping to 0 taxa, labeling characters with other identifiers, etc.)

```
dot -Tsvg output-m25_n25_s1_k1_loss0.1-vis.txt

```

![Graphvis visualization](example-visualization.png)
